Now, first
I'd like you to explain to me your educational
background. How and why did you acquire your
degree? Where did you go to school? What were your
interests? Well, I was born over in eastern
Washington in 1905. on a farm between two trout
streams.
I went to the proverbial one-room schoolhouse for
a number of years until I got to about the eighth
grade when I went to high school. The eighth grade I
took in town to prepare for the high school, which I
attended and graduated in 19. Well, this is just
after, shortly after World War I. At times, we
weren't quite in the Depression then, but times
weren't too good.
decided when I got through high school, which was
1922, that I was going to go on to university. I
thought that I could better myself by going to
university. But first I had to go out and make a
little bit of money before I could do that. So I
worked in the lumber mills and harvest fields and
on concrete gangs and section gangs and what not.
In a couple of years I had enough of a stake to come on
to university. Well in high school I sort of liked
physics
and sciences. One thing we didn't have was
chemistry. So I looked over the field then and it
looked to me as though if you took chemistry and did
fairly well in it why you had a broad spectrum that
you could later go into and so I took chemistry
and but I wasn't able to go full-time too long I'd
work on the side and lay off and from school and
work, so I didn't finish up my bachelor's until
about 1930.
During this time, I continued my work in different
manual
endeavors. piling lumber and a few things like
that. As a matter of fact, I made more money piling
lumber than I did for many years after I had my Ph.D.
But one of the chemistry professors here was
Professor Honesty Thompson. And so I
was in his quant class in chemistry and
qualitative analysis class. Later on, I was his
teaching fellow. And he got me interested in some
of the work that was going on. One of the first
things we did that he was concerned with was a
saltwater intrusion into Lake Washington and
Lake Union system through the ship canal. And so we
went there with a bunch of us as students, graduate
students. We worked on this problem to see the
efficiency of the locks and getting rid of the salt
water that they brought back into the lake and into
the canal system.
This started me, got me interested in water
movements, water chemistry, water flow. So, I
ended up by getting a, finally got a master's, or
finally got a doctorate in the fall of 36. here at
the university in chemistry with a minor in
physics.
But before that time, I was at Friday Harbor with
Dr. Thompson in 1931 and 1932 when this building
was was built. He had gotten some Rockefeller
funds to build this building here on the campus
with. And he had organized the oceanographic
laboratories.
And so we worked out of Friday Harbor in the summer
outside the school year from June through August.
working on the waters of the system from the Strait
of Juan de Fuca into the Strait of Georgia and into
Puget Sound. Then in 1933, the opportunity
came to go with the Navy up to Adak and make some
oceanographic observations. making a survey of
the harbors, the waters around Adak. And so this
gave me an opportunity to go out in the field. And
then I left my teaching fellowship here. I got
someone else to pinch hit for me. And I went up in May
and didn't get back until, oh, long in September.
And I did some of the first oceanographic work. by
U.S. up in the Bering Sea. And next summer, I went up
on a Coast Guard vessel and worked from the
Aleutian Islands up through Bering Strait and the
eastern part of Bering Sea. And this material, was
the basis of my doctoral dissertation.
By the time I got through, there were really no jobs
in oceanography in that day. No one knew of
oceanographers. In fact,
one well-known man, from Texas and Fisheries that
I knew said that he didn't have any use for
oceanography and he wouldn't know an
oceanographer if he saw one. And what's more, he
never expected a need or hire one.
Well, this was along in the Depression days.
And
as a part-time work, before I got my degree, I also
joined some other labs and set up a spray residue
laboratory. Then people were becoming concerned
with the arsenic and the lead on apples. So I worked
with the pure food and drugs. and then I had our own
private lab. It didn't make too much money because
it was seasonal, but that gave me a little boost.
And then when I finally finished up in 1936, the
depression was still pretty strong, but one of my
co-teaching fellows, Bert Thomas, who was later
president and director of Battelle Memorial
Institute, had gone back to Columbus and was just
getting pretty well established. And when I came
along, he urged me to come back to Columbus, Ohio at
Battelle, which I did from late 1936. through
until 1940. But I was still looking for some way to
get back out to sea.
As you know, Columbus is pretty well landlocked.
And a civil service announcement came through for
someone,
a physical oceanographer, work with the
International Ice Patrol. And so I applied,
filled in my application for that, sent in my
resume, and I was chosen to fill that billet. And at
the time, I think, I ended up, at that time, I think I
was one of three physical oceanographers and
employee of the United States government. The
other one, Floyd Sowell, also being up, another
one being on the International Ice Board all
night, and the other one, I guess, was down in
Washington. So I went to Woods Hole in 1940, and a
typical New England blizzard drove up from
Columbus, Ohio, and it was the last car on the road
before I finally got into a Falmouth Mass and took a
night's lodging before I pushed on to Woods Hole
because the drifts were three and four feet deep
across the road.
And then I joined Floyd's Soul on the
International Ice Patrol. This was in February of
1940. In March, we pushed off for the Grand Banks
with the summer base at Newfoundland, St. John's,
to work out the dynamics of the flow patterns in the
ice patrol area so that we could predict about
where the birds would move and to afford guidance
to the
maritime interests so they could avoid the
iceberg areas as a basis of changing the routes
depending on how much ice we had and how many birds
we had down in the area and so on. Well, I was on that
job in 1940, but things were beginning to get a
little sticky along in 1940. So we... I cruised the
east and west coasts of Greenland, up as far as Cape
York on the west coast, throughout Baffin Bay, and
doing a little bit of seeing how things were going.
You weren't hunting for German submarines? Not
submarines. We did pick up a few people. One of them
was a good Norwegian, Willie Knudsen, who had We
picked up in East Greenland and brought him out to
the States. The Knudsen family is famous in
oceanography. And I saw him some years later when
he was a captain in the Air Force.
But then in 1941, it was more or less a repeat of
1940.
One of the things that we did do
was do, in 1940, we
heard a number of SOS's when we were out on ice
patrol. So we put in St. John's and I cruised up
towards Denmark's strait where the ships had been
torpedoed, and with Sol and the skipper and the
staff, we worked out the probable position of
where the drifting boats might be, and we got up
into the area. On one day, I think it was Sunday, we
heard the planes overhead, which is very unusual
for that part of the
North Atlantic. We couldn't dope it out, and our
codes wouldn't break any of the messages, so we
didn't have high enough classification for that.
During the night, we heard that the hood had been
sunk.
Did you find any survivors? We picked up two
lifeboats, not from this supply, but from the
torpedoed ships, TS Marconi. We picked up their
SOS and got their approximate position. We picked
up two of those lifeboats. It was in dense fog. And
we'd run a little ways and stop. And one time when we
were stopped, we heard voices out on the sea. And
one of the boats, we kept blasting our new whistle.
And one of the boats came right up alongside us. We
took them aboard. They went out about six, seven
days then, because we had to come in from patrol.
And we fueled and provisioned to go up and pick them
up. And then during that. a break while we were
continuing our search. We heard some very heavy
cannonading going on. But being on a 125-footer
painted white, we didn't have any particular
qualms about that. And so on the breaks, we found
another lifeboat. We picked it up. So we picked up
39 survivors. We had 36 aboard our own ship, and we
brought them back to St. John's. Well, at the end of
1941, of course, by that time, we were getting
involved.
So instead of working out of Woods Hole and getting
back once in a while, was assigned to Argentia and
slapped into a uniform.
Spent from then until about 1946,
early 1946, on the scouting for eyes. First I
hitchhiked on the different planes, then I got
some planes and finally a few ships to run around up
there. Played around in the North Atlantic and
covered the area from the Nova Scotian and Grand
Banks up through Baffin Bay, Ungava Bay, and west
to Churchill. So that was my area. Were
you trying to trace the sea lanes open for the Navy?
What we were doing was two things. First, we were
trying to be able to predict ahead of time where the
ice edge would be
found so that we could try to keep them close to it
but not into it so that we could cover the ships by
plane from a land base to keep the subs down.
then be able to have enough flexibility to make the
convoy routings so that we wouldn't cross paths
with convoys and all these things that you have to
be aware of besides the ice in the area. And then the
problem also was being able to predict as soon as we
could get the ships into where we were... putting
the bases in
for running small planes, because at that time it
appeared as though we might have to fly a lot of
small planes across to Europe. And so we had bases,
airstrips,
through a part of the area over in Greenland and up
in the Canadian, northern Canada.
Part of the problem was to be able to predict just
when the ice would open up so you could get the ships
into the base without them setting off the ice edge
and setting docks for any protracted period where
they were vulnerable. And so this
was the... the sequence there. And then... Were
you trying to base your predictions on ocean
currents? We used, yes. Insofar as around Grand
Banks, we always made our dynamic charts. And in
the days pre-calculator or pre the modern
electronic devices,
Sol and myself would get out a chart of the dynamic
topography, which would give us some idea of the
probable ice drift. And we generally completed
the chart within two hours after we took our last
oceanographic station.
And so we had a good picture of where the icebergs
would tend to come down on the eastern edge of the
Grand Banks. where they would switch over into the
extension of the Gulf Stream, the North Atlantic
Current, and start off to the Northeast. And it was
this important part that enabled
us to set the shipping lanes and convoy routes,
because you The shortest way, by great circle,
would cut right across the banks, right through
the ice area. And so we liked to be able to route them
as close as possible without getting into ice
difficulty.
So along came 1936, and we were through with this
particular job and I got orders to go to Washington
and the Marshall Islands. Ah, okay.
And so I went from Argentia, Newfoundland through
Frisco to Hawaii at the Marshall Islands without
coming back through Seattle. the family being in
Seattle when I was away for about five years. And
so we were out on the bow ditch to make the
pre-survey of Bikini, to find out something about
the currents, to establish the...
the biological regimes, to get a survey of those,
both on shore on the different islands of the
atolls, both at Bikini and at Inuitak and at
Ronzeland. Who worked with you in measuring the
currents here? Well, I had some of the then, I would
say, the young bloods in the game with me on the
Bowditch. Roger Revell was on another ship that
had sort of an overall project, but I was on the
physical subgroup that was on the Bowditch that
did the preliminary survey. So we had Walter Monk,
Gordon Riley, Martin Johnson,
Marston Sargent, and Bill Van Arks, Bill Ford, one
of the Canadian chaps
with us, Tommy Austin, Hal Turner from Woods Hole.
Most of the people were from Woods Hole. One,
except for Walter Monk and some of the others, we
had William Randolph Taylor from Michigan,
Leonard P. Schultz from the National Museum. We
picked up several people who are still in the
service one way or the other, one service or
another. Mel Traylor had been with the Marines. He
was one of my assistants.
We had Vern Brock from Hawaii,
and a number of others. Ken Emery from USC and
Scripps. So we had a
fairly sizable group. that we used in this survey
starting in about February when we got out there
and all set up in 1946.
We carried through Project Abel and Baker and I got
back to Washington D.C. along about September of
that year. Had you known any of those guys before?
Some I had known. Of course, Martin Johnson was
originally from the University of Washington. I
knew him. Schultz had been here for a while.
Donaldson over in fisheries was on one of the other
ships. So I knew some of that group. It
was my first meeting with some of the younger
people. That was the first time you met Walter
Mook, wasn't it? I met... I think so, although I've
been down at...
I believe this was the first time that I actually
met Walter.
What did you expect to happen when you discovered
they were going to drop a bomb? Did you have any
anticipation of events?
I think, as you know, there's lots of things we
didn't know, just what the bomb would do and all.
But
we did, I think, come up with a pretty fair analysis
of what was likely to happen with the radiation
that got into the water. We had, in fact, built on
arcs, went back to Woods Hole and built a little
model to help out some of our studies. He
was able to
make enough checks with our field measurements.
We had a pretty good feeling of what was going to
happen to the stuff that got into the water.
a job to really look at that that went into the
atmosphere, because we didn't know that. But if it
did come down in the water in the area, we knew
enough about the general currents and so on to know
a little bit about where to expect it to go. So I
believe that we had a good feeling for the limits of
what might be put on it. And nothing came amiss as
far
as what wasn't within the realm of what we knew.
And afterwards, of course, we had to go in and do a
little bit of some measurements to get an idea of
how it had obeyed what we thought might happen. And
also to take a reassessment of some of the biota in
the system.
And you were reasonably satisfied with the
results? You think you did a pretty good job when
you went back in? I think we did a reasonable job.
Now, with our with our group there. And I have a
picture of that group that was with me that I'll
show you later that you may be interested in.
But it seemed to be pretty well in hand by the time
along
about the first of September, late August, when I
finally felt that I could leave. and get back to
Washington, D.C.
So I returned to Washington, D.C. and wound up some
of my immediate duties there and made
arrangements to move my family possessions from
Woods Hole to Washington, DC. And I came back and
took a little time off before I went back to
Washington to join Dick Fleming in the
Hydrographic Office. oceanography section
there, which was just being set up at that time. So I
was in hydro with Dick Fleming, and we had two
people that had been out with us, two or three
people that had actually been out with us on the
Bikini. I came back, John Lyman was one of them, and
Tommy Austin.
another and
Horace Whaley was another and later went to
Chesapeake Bay Institute.